Be Fair to Others

Once my aunt took me to her ladies’ club to preside over a function. There was a delay due to some miscommunication among the organizers, so I was made to wait in the antechamber, where I couldn’t do anything but observe the people around. I often feel that studying people’s behaviour is more interesting than reading a book.
The ladies’ club is in a posh area of Bangalore and is considered an elite institution. The members are mostly from the upper middle-class and most of them are well settled and well travelled. They were busy conversing about all the topics under the sun, from silk saris to the most recent English film in the town. My aunt was talking to her friend, Shanta, and they were engrossed in conversation. My aunt’s voice was a little loud and though I was seated at a distance I could hear her conversation quite clearly.
‘It is really wrong on your daughter-in-law’s part,’ my aunt declared like a Supreme Court judge. She was confident that her judgement was perfect, but she dragged me into the conversation anyway, just to get my opinion. ‘Be fair. Is it correct on her part to behave like that?’
‘Who is she?’
‘Shanta’s daughter-in-law, Rashmi. She wants an easy life and loves to relax in far-off places during the school holidays.’
I looked so confused that my aunt decided to give me a brief history of the problem. ‘Rashmi’s in-laws, that is Shanta’s family, are rich. They earned their wealth through hard work. Rashmi hails from an ordinary middle-class family and she loves to enjoy the money that she never earned. She wants to buy new
 
clothes every month. As soon as her husband comes home, she wants to go out for a film or somewhere else. She gets up late in the morning …’ The list of complaints was never-ending.
I suddenly thought of Radhika, my cousin, the daughter of the same aunt.
Radhika too was married into a wealthy business family. Radhika was a schoolteacher and quite used to working very hard. After her marriage, I had met her at my place once. I could not believe what I saw. She had bloated up like a balloon. She was dressed in an expensive sari and decked with ornaments.
Radhika explained her daily routine to me. ‘I get up in the morning around nine.’
‘Why so late?’
‘We have plenty of servants at home. They do all the work. Why should I get up so early? I worked a lot before marriage. Mahesh is very busy so I wait for his arrival from office. As soon as he comes, I want to go out for a film or a walk. I have not seen much of the world and managing two kids for the whole year is tiring. I’ve told Mahesh that we should go abroad for every holiday. Let it be Nepal or Sri Lanka, but I want to travel abroad during the school holidays.’
Thinking of what Radhika had said, I interrupted my aunt’s complaints to ask, ‘How is Radhika?’
‘She’s fine. Poor child. Her mother-in-law is a nagging type. She comments on everything. She is lucky to have a daughter-in-law like Radhika. If her mother-in-law had a daughter-in-law like Rashmi, then she would appreciate my daughter’s worth.’
I felt depressed. These elderly women, despite being educated, were behaving like kindergarten children. What one’s daughter does is all right but when a daughter-in-law does the same thing, then everything is wrong. The yardsticks are different because one is your daughter and the other is somebody else’s daughter.
All this time I had been wondering what I should talk about to the gathering. At times, I feel at a loss because I don’t know what topic will be of interest to the audience. Now I had decided—I would speak on the topic ‘Be fair to others’.
 
